Add blog article: Howto create a batch source with the new Source framework (#641)
apache/flink-web: docs/content/posts/2023-04-13-howto-create-batch-source.md

---
title:  "Howto create a batch source with the new Source framework"
date: "2023-04-13T08:00:00.000Z"
authors:
- echauchot:
  name: "Etienne Chauchot"
  twitter: "echauchot"
aliases:
- /2023/04/13/howto-create-batch-source.html
---

## Introduction

> Flink community has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Flink community has
```

designed [a new Source framework](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.16/docs/dev/datastream/sources/)
based
on [FLIP-27](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-27%3A+Refactor+Source+Interface)

> lately. Some connectors have migrated to this new framework. This article is an howto create a batch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lately. Some connectors have migrated to this new framework. This article is a how-to for creating a batch
```

source using this new framework. It was built while implementing
the [Flink batch source](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/commit/72e3bef1fb9ee6042955b5e9871a9f70a8837cca)

> for [Cassandra](https://cassandra.apache.org/_/index.html). I felt it could be useful to people
> interested in contributing or migrating connectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for [Cassandra](https://cassandra.apache.org/_/index.html).
If you are interested in contributing or migrating connectors, this blog post is for you!.
```

## Implementing the source components

The aim here is not to duplicate the official documentation. For details you should read the
documentation, the javadocs or the Cassandra connector code. The links are above. The goal here is

> to give field feedback on how to implement the different components.

Reviewer: note to self: Re-phrase this; it reads too much like "don't read this".

Author: you feel it reads like "don't read the doc and code" or like "don't read the article" ?

Reviewer: like "don't read the article". I think I'd just remove the entire paragraph?

Author: I don't have this impression but fair enough, removed the paragraph

The source interface only does the "glue" between all the other components. Its role is to
instantiate all of them and to define the source [Boundedness](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/Boundedness.html). We also do the source configuration
here along with user configuration validation.

### SourceReader
[example Cassandra SourceReader](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/blob/d92dc8d891098a9ca6a7de6062b4630079beaaef/flink-connector-cassandra/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/connector/cassandra/source/reader/CassandraSourceReader.java)

As shown in the graphic above, the instances of the [SourceReader](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SourceReader.html) (which we will call simply readers
in the continuation of this article) run in parallel in task managers to read the actual data which
is divided into [Splits](#split-and-splitstate). Readers request splits from the [SplitEnumerator](#splitenumerator-and-splitenumeratorstate) and the resulting splits are
assigned to them in return.

> Luckily for us Flink provides the [SourceReaderBase](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/SourceReaderBase.html) implementation that takes care of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink provides the [SourceReaderBase](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/SourceReaderBase.html) implementation that takes care of the
```

> synchronization between the readers and the main thread. Flink also provides a useful extension to

Reviewer: It is not clear which "main thread" this is referring to.

Author: I was referring to the mailbox main thread but I did not want to give too much detail to the reader. Especially avoid describing Flink internals because it is off topic of the current article.

Author: So I propose to stay general and just say "Flink provides the SourceReaderBase implementation that takes care of all the threading."

Author: done

this class for most cases: [SingleThreadMultiplexSourceReaderBase](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/SingleThreadMultiplexSourceReaderBase.html). This class avoids having to

> specify the threading model as it is already configured to read splits with one thread using one

Reviewer: It's not clear why the threading model is a concern.

Author: it is not. I just wanted to say that it is already done for us. I will rephrase

Author: done

[SplitReader](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/splitreader/SplitReader.html). This is not harmful to the performance of the source as the SourceReaders run in

> parallel among the task managers.

Reviewer: > read splits with one thread using one [SplitReader]

> This is not harmful to the performance of the source as the SourceReaders run in
parallel among the task managers.

This sounds contradicting.

Author: I agree it needs clearer phrasing. I propose "each reader instance reads splits using one thread (but there are several reader instances that live among task managers)".

Author: done

What we have left to do in the SourceReader class is:
* Provide a [SplitReader](#splitreader) supplier
* Create a [RecordEmitter](#recordemitter)
* Create the shared resources for the SplitReaders (sessions, etc...). As the SplitReader supplier is
created in the SourceReader constructor in a super() call, using a SourceReader factory to create

> the shared resources and pass them to the supplier seems a good idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the shared resources and pass them to the supplier is a good idea.
```

possible, it is preferable to generate the splits lazily, meaning that each time a reader asks the
enumerator for a split, the enumerator generates one on demand and assigns it to the reader. For
that we implement [SplitEnumerator#handleSplitRequest()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#handleSplitRequest-int-java.lang.String-). Lazy splits generation is preferable to
splits discovery, in which we pre-generate all the splits and store them waiting to assign them to
the readers. Indeed, in some situations, the number of splits can be enormous at consume a lot a
memory which could be problematic in case of straggling readers. The framework offers the ability to
act upon reader registration by implementing [addReader()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#addReader-int-) but, as we do lazy splits generation, we
have nothing to do there. In some case, generating a split is too costly, so we can pre-generate a

> batch (not all) of splits to amortize this cost. the number/size of batched splits need to be taken

Reviewer: ```suggestion
batch (not all) of splits to amortize this cost. The number/size of batched splits need to be taken
```

into account to avoid consuming too much memory.

Long story short, the tricky part of the source implementation is splitting the source data. The
good equilibrium to find is not to have to many splits (which could lead to too much memory
consumption) nor too few (which could lead to sub-optimal parallelism). One good way to meet this
equilibrium is to evaluate the size of the source data upfront and allow the user to specify the
maximum memory a split will take. That way he can configure this parameter accordingly to the memory
available on the task managers. Of course, the size of the source data needs to be evaluated without
reading the actual data. For the Cassandra connector it was done [like this](https://echauchot.blogspot.com/2023/03/cassandra-evaluate-table-size-without.html). The general rule of thumb

> regarding splitting is to let the user some freedom but protect him from unwanted behavior: if he

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regarding splitting is to let the user some freedom but protect him from unwanted behavior: if they
```

> wants to process a 1GB table in 1MB splits with 1 subtask he should be free to do so. But, as we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
want to process a 1GB table in 1MB splits with 1 subtask they should be free to do so. But, as we
```

allow the user to set a max split size, we should still ensure it is not too small to avoid having

> too many splits, we must also provide a default maximum. For these safety measures, rigid thresholds

Reviewer: It is not clear why a default maximum ensures that splits aren't too small.

Author: I agree, needs rephrasing

Author: done

> don't work well as the source my start to fail when the thresholds are suddenly exceeded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't work well as the source may start to fail when the thresholds are suddenly exceeded.
```

Maybe add an example for when this would happen; like a periodically run job on a growing table.

Another important topic is state. If the job manager fails, the split enumerator needs to recover.
For that, as for the split, we need to provide a state for the enumerator (that will be part of a
checkpoint) and return it when [SplitEnumerator#snapshotState()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#snapshotState-long-) is called. Here also the
SplitEnumerator is to be considered immutable. Any update to the state of the SplitEnumerator, must
be done in the associated [SplitEnumeratorState](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html). So, we don't create the state when snapshotState()

> is called but rather in the enumerator's constructor and return it in snapshotState(). The state

Reviewer: It's not clear _why_ this should be done.

There's strictly speaking no requirement for the `SplitEnumerator` to be immutable.
They can convert the `SplitEnumeratorState` given via the constructor to some internal mutable representation, and return a completely new `SplitEnumeratorState` in `snapshotState()`.

Some would argue that the `SplitEnumeratorState` should be immutable, because that is data being passed to other components.

Author: Fair enough, I'll remove the immutable advice and explain the snapshot/recovery

Author: Already fixed, did you see it ?

Author: ah, just saw you approved the PR, so I guess this is resolved

> must contain everything needed to resume where the enumerator was left off after failover . In lazy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must contain everything needed to resume where the enumerator was left off after failover. In lazy
```

failing reader, can be put back into the enumerator state for later re-assignment to readers. There
is no memory size risk here as the number of splits to reassign is pretty low.

The above topics are the more important regarding splitting. There are 2 methods left to implement:
the usual [start()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#start--)/[close()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#close--) methods for resources creation/disposal. Regarding implementing start(),
the Flink connector framework provides [enumeratorContext#callAsync()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumeratorContext.html#callAsync-java.util.concurrent.Callable-java.util.function.BiConsumer-long-long-) utility to run long processing

> asynchronously such as splits preparation or splits discovery (if lazy splits generation is

Reviewer: "Why would I want to do that?"

Author: what do you mean? 
Well, I guess as long as splitting the source data is possible, the enumerator can create the splits lazily by just keeping a state of where last served split ended. 
Is that what you meant ?

Reviewer: What is missing is why I'd want to do this asynchronously. (sorry for not being clearer)

Author: ok, I'll add some explanations on why long processes should be done asynchronously

Author: done

* Split: splits are serialized when sending them from enumerator to reader, and when checkpointing
  the reader's current state
* SplitEnumeratorState:  the serializer is used for the result of the
  SplitEnumerator#snapshotState()

For both, we need to implement [SimpleVersionedSerializer](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/core/io/SimpleVersionedSerializer.html)
. Care needs to be taken at some important points:

* Using Java serialization is [forbidden](https://flink.apache.org/contributing/code-style-and-quality-java.html#java-serialization)
  in Flink mainly for migration concerns. We should rather manually write the fields of the objects
  using ObjectOutputStream. When a class is not supported by the ObjectOutputStream (not String,
  Integer, Long...), we should write the size of the object in bytes as an Integer and then write
  the object converted to byte[]. Similar method is used to serialize collections. First write the
  number of elements of the collection, then serialize all the contained objects. Of course, for
  deserialization we do the exact same reading with the same order.

> * Flink provides a helpful utility for serde: [IOUtils](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/util/IOUtils.html).

Reviewer: It may have been a mistake to use this method in the connector because it's not part of the public API.

I'll open a PR to fix that...

Author: :+1:

> * There can be a lot of splits, so we should cache the OuputStream used in SplitSerializer. We can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There can be a lot of splits, so we should cache the OutputStream used in SplitSerializer. We can
```

  do so by using.

`  ThreadLocal<DataOutputSerializer> SERIALIZER_CACHE =
  ThreadLocal.withInitial(() -> new DataOutputSerializer(64));`

The initial stream size depends on the size of a split. 

## Testing the source

For the sake of concision of this article, testing the source will be the object of the next article. Stay tuned !

## Conclusion

This article gathering the implementation field feedback was needed as the javadocs cannot cover all
the implementation details for high-performance and maintainable sources. I hope you enjoyed reading

> and that it gave you the envy to contribute a new connector to the Flink project !

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and that it gave you the desire to contribute a new connector to the Flink project !
```

---
title:  "Howto create a batch source with the new Source framework"
date: "2023-04-13T08:00:00.000Z"
authors:

- echauchot:
  name: "Etienne Chauchot"
  twitter: "echauchot"

---

## Introduction

The Flink community has
designed [a new Source framework](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.16/docs/dev/datastream/sources/)
based
on [FLIP-27](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-27%3A+Refactor+Source+Interface)
lately. Some connectors have migrated to this new framework. This article is a how-to for creating a
batch
source using this new framework. It was built while implementing
the [Flink batch source](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/commit/72e3bef1fb9ee6042955b5e9871a9f70a8837cca)
for [Cassandra](https://cassandra.apache.org/_/index.html).

> If you are interested in contributing or migrating connectors, this blog post is for you!.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in contributing or migrating connectors, this blog post is for you!
```

## Implementing the source components

The aim here is not to duplicate the official documentation. For details you should read the
documentation, the javadocs or the Cassandra connector code. The links are above. The goal here is
to give field feedback on how to implement the different components.

The source architecture is depicted in the diagrams below:

![](/img/blog/2023-04-13-howto-create-batch-source/source_components.svg)

![](/img/blog/2023-04-13-howto-create-batch-source/source_reader.svg)

### Source

> [example Cassandra Source](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/blob/d92dc8d891098a9ca6a7de6062b4630079beaaef/flink-connector-cassandra/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/connector/cassandra/source/CassandraSource.java)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Example: Cassandra Source](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/blob/d92dc8d891098a9ca6a7de6062b4630079beaaef/flink-connector-cassandra/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/connector/cassandra/source/CassandraSource.java)
```
The lower-case "example" looks odd.

Author: :+1:

Author: done

The source interface only does the "glue" between all the other components. Its role is to
instantiate all of them and to define the
source [Boundedness](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/Boundedness.html)
. We also do the source configuration
here along with user configuration validation.

### SourceReader

[example Cassandra SourceReader](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/blob/d92dc8d891098a9ca6a7de6062b4630079beaaef/flink-connector-cassandra/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/connector/cassandra/source/reader/CassandraSourceReader.java)

As shown in the graphic above, the instances of
the [SourceReader](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SourceReader.html) (

> which we will call simply readers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [SourceReader](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SourceReader.html) 
(which we will call simply readers
```
This caused empty space after the first brace.

Author: yes it is the auto format that messed it up

* Implement [onSplitFinished()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/SourceReaderBase.html#onSplitFinished-java.util.Map-):
here, as it is a batch source (finite data), we should ask the
Enumerator for next split

### Split and SplitState

[example Cassandra Split](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/blob/d92dc8d891098a9ca6a7de6062b4630079beaaef/flink-connector-cassandra/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/connector/cassandra/source/split/CassandraSplit.java)

The [SourceSplit](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SourceSplit.html)
represents a partition of the source data. What defines a split depends on the
backend we are reading from. It could be a _(partition start, partition end)_ tuple or an _(offset,
split size)_ tuple for example.

In any case, the Split object should be seen as an immutable object: any update to it should be done
on the
associated [SplitState](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/SourceReaderBase.html)

> . The split state is the one that will be stored inside the Flink

Reviewer: ```suggestion
associated [SplitState](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/connector/base/source/reader/SourceReaderBase.html).
The split state is the one that will be stored inside the Flink
```

[checkpoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/concepts/stateful-stream-processing/#checkpointing)
. A checkpoint may happen between 2 fetches for 1 split. So, if we're reading a split, we
must store in the split state the current state of the reading process. This current state needs to
be something serializable (because it will be part of a checkpoint) and something that the backend
source can resume from. That way, in case of failover, the reading could be resumed from where it
was left off. Thus we ensure there will be no duplicates or lost data. For example, if the records
reading order is deterministic in the backend, then the split state can store the number _n_ of

> already read records to restart at _n+1_ after failover.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was left off. Thus we ensure there will be no duplicates or lost data.  
For example, if the records
reading order is deterministic in the backend, then the split state can store the number _n_ of
already read records to restart at _n+1_ after failover.
```
whitespace again

and [SplitEnumeratorState](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-cassandra/blob/d92dc8d891098a9ca6a7de6062b4630079beaaef/flink-connector-cassandra/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/connector/cassandra/source/enumerator/CassandraEnumeratorState.java)

The [SplitEnumerator](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html)
is responsible for creating the splits and serving them to the readers. Whenever
possible, it is preferable to generate the splits lazily, meaning that each time a reader asks the
enumerator for a split, the enumerator generates one on demand and assigns it to the reader. For
that we
implement [SplitEnumerator#handleSplitRequest()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#handleSplitRequest-int-java.lang.String-)
. Lazy splits generation is preferable to
splits discovery, in which we pre-generate all the splits and store them waiting to assign them to

> the readers. Indeed, in some situations, the number of splits can be enormous at consume a lot a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the readers. Indeed, in some situations, the number of splits can be enormous and consume a lot a
```

memory which could be problematic in case of straggling readers. The framework offers the ability to
act upon reader registration by
implementing [addReader()](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/source/SplitEnumerator.html#addReader-int-)
but, as we do lazy splits generation, we

> have nothing to do there. In some case, generating a split is too costly, so we can pre-generate a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have nothing to do there. In some cases, generating a split is too costly, so we can pre-generate a
```

batch (not all) of splits to amortize this cost. The number/size of batched splits need to be taken
into account to avoid consuming too much memory.

Long story short, the tricky part of the source implementation is splitting the source data. The
good equilibrium to find is not to have too many splits (which could lead to too much memory
consumption) nor too few (which could lead to sub-optimal parallelism). One good way to meet this
equilibrium is to evaluate the size of the source data upfront and allow the user to specify the
maximum memory a split will take. That way they can configure this parameter accordingly to the
memory
available on the task managers. This parameter is optional so the source needs to provide a default
value. Also, the source needs to control that the user provided max-split-size is not too little
which would
lead to too many splits. The general rule of thumb is to let the user some freedom but protect him
from unwanted behavior.
For these safety measures, rigid thresholds

> don't work well as the source may start to fail when the thresholds are suddenly exceeded. For
> example if we enforce the number of splits is below twice the parallelism, if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't work well as the source may start to fail when the thresholds are suddenly exceeded.  
For example if we enforce that the number of splits is below twice the parallelism, if
```
